---
layout: post
title:  "Modern C, Jens Gustedt Level 0 Encounter"
categories: [books]
tags: [modern_c]
date:   2020-03-05 12:00:00 -0500
---

All material is copyright of the original Author. I do not claim any material or code used as my own.
What follows are my own notes and paraphrasing of the original material.

## Level 0 Notes - Encounter

### Getting Started

Sections
: Introduction to Imperative Programming
: Compiling/Running C Code

This section serves as an introduction to the C programming language and imperative programming. If you don't have any programming experience, then the things presented in this section might be overwhelming. If you have programming experience, this section might be too little information.

Regardless: __don't panic__

Take a break if nothing is making sense anymore or things are too challenging. Keep the fingers off the
keyboard and come back with a fresh set of eyes. Be concerned more with the problem solving strategy rather
than getting bogged down in all of the coding details. The code should follow if you know the language and
understand the actual problem at hand.

#### Imperative Programming

C is an **imperative** programming language. It aids the programmer in issuing orders to the computer in an
imperative sense. That is, we provide statements in C which reflect the way we express similar concepts in
human language or thought. C is meant to be a link between the human programmer and the physical machine. We
need to be able to write orders in a way that the human reader and writer can understand quickly
and effectively while eventually becoming executable by the machine itself.

Like many other high-level programming languages, C contains both characters specific to the C
language while also utilizing English words in its syntax. We will explore the meaning of how these different
characters and words operate together to form the grammar of C.

C programs have several different components that make up layers that mix and work together. What follows is
an example program. I prefer to use two spaces for indentation rather than four.

```c
// listing1.1.c

#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
  double A[5] = {
    [0] = 9.0,
    [1] = 2.9,
    [4] = 3.E+25,
    [3] = .00007
  };

  for (size_t i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {
    printf("element %zu is %g, \tits square is %g\n",
      i,
      A[i],
      A[i] * A[i]);
  }
  return EXIT_SUCCESS;
}
```

I compiled this program on my machine (Ubuntu, intel i7 8700k, x86) with `c99 listing1.1.c` and executed it with `./a.out`.

Output:

```zsh
element 0 is 9,         its square is 81
element 1 is 2.9,       its square is 8.41
element 2 is 0,         its square is 0
element 3 is 7e-05,     its square is 4.9e-09
element 4 is 3e+25,     its square is 9e+50
```

It's relatively straightforward to see where in the program the output generated is formed and executed.
`printf` in particular is the function call that makes this happen. C calls this a **statement** whereas in
other environments it may be called an instruction. Statements are a basic fundamental building block of
programs written in an imperative programming style.

`printf` receives several arguments which are enclosed in parentheses. The text which appears inside the
parentheses are called string literals. It helps format the the output that we see when the program executes.
Within the string literal are format specifiers which aid in positioning variables in the output. These markers
start with the `%` symbols. We also see escape characters appear in the string literal to aid in formatting.
These start with the backslash character. `\t` for the tab and `\n` for a newline.

Following the string literal, we see the character `i` on the next line. `i` will be inserted in place of `%zu`
during program execution.

After `i`, we see the next argument to `printf`, `A[i]`. This is array indexing. The value of the array `A` at
index `i` will be placed in the position of the first `%g` in the output.

The last argument to `printf` is the value `A[i] * A[i]`, which will take the place of the last `%g` in the
formatted output.

The meaning of all these arguments will be explored in a bit. What we have done thus far is identify what the
main purpose of the program is, that being to print out a series of arguments to the screen. The program calls
the `printf` function to do this work for us. That is, it conducts orders on our behalf that the computer
executes.

#### Compiling/running C programs

Source code is what expressed to the machine what we would like it to do for us. Then it must be the case that
source code is just like any other text that can be stored or manipulated on our computer's disk or memory.
However, this source code is not something which is directly understandable and executable by our computer's
processor. We need something called a **compiler** to translate the C program's source code to something which
is executable directly on our processor. The result is a binary or executable file. These files contain
instructions which are directly understandable by a specific platform. These compilation specifics can be
too much for even a single other text, so we will not go too deeply in those details now. However, it is
necessary to understand the interfaces to the tools that we utilize for compilation.

The name of your C compiler and the arguments it accepts will depend on your specific operating system
environment and platform. There is a good reason for this: the binary code that the compiler outputs is
actually platform specific. That is, the binary is only compatible with certain computers. C's purpose is
to provide a useful abstraction on top of several different machine languages. This abstraction typically
lives on top of another program, called the assembler.

A C program which is correct is portable across different computer platforms/architectures. This book will
focus heavily on writing what is viewed as 'correct' C code to ensure proper portability across computers.
There may be some platforms that claim to be correct C but do not properly implement the latest specification.
There may also exist some platforms which are correct but also accept incorrect programs or provide support for
C that are non-standard and not portable. Running and testing a C program on a single platform does not
guarantee portability in an acceptable sense.

The purpose of the compiler is to make sure that the programs written in C, such as the small one written above, is executable on a platform that it is compiled for. Since my machine is running WSL/Ubuntu, I have
access to c99. I wrote above the command I used to compile and execute the example C program. Here is the
command the book gives as an example.

```zsh
c99 -Wall -o listing1.1 listing1.1.c -lm
```

Let's break this line down a bit.

* c99 is the name of the compiler program
* -Wall warns us about anything the compiler finds to be strange during execution of compilation
* -o listing1.1 indicates what the output file should be named
* listing1.1.c indicates the name of the source file that contains C code we want to compile.
* -lm lets the compiler know that we want to add some standard math functions to the compilation. We will need these later.

As shown above, execute this compiled program using

```zsh
./listing1.1
```

Portability means the behavior of the program is identical across computers. If you were to execute the
example program from above on your machine, you should see the same output. However, it is often the case that
we will write programs that work only sometimes or only partially. They may produce unreliable results that
do not make sense on other machines. The compiler might also complain about certain statements in your code.
Take this as an example.

```c
// listing1.2.c

void main() {
  int i;
  double A[5] = {
    9.0,
    2.9,
    3.E*25,
    .00007,
  };

  for (i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {
    printf("element %d is %g, \tits square is %g\n",
           i,
           A[i],
           A[i] * A[i]);
  }

  return 0;
}
```

Compile this with a command such as

```shell
c99 -Wall -o listing1.2 listing1.2.c  
```

You should see some output that looks like

```zsh
listing1.2.c:1:6: warning: return type of ‘main’ is not ‘int’ [-Wmain]
 void main() {
      ^~~~
listing1.2.c: In function ‘main’:
listing1.2.c:11:5: warning: implicit declaration of function ‘printf’ [-Wimplicit-function-declaration]
     printf("element %d is %g, \tits square is %g\n",
     ^~~~~~
listing1.2.c:11:5: warning: incompatible implicit declaration of built-in function ‘printf’
listing1.2.c:11:5: note: include ‘<stdio.h>’ or provide a declaration of ‘printf’
listing1.2.c:17:10: warning: ‘return’ with a value, in function returning void
   return 0;
          ^
listing1.2.c:1:6: note: declared here
 void main() {
```

Now we see quite a few warnings. Despite this, the compiler still produced an executable binary file.
However, the output from running this program may appear a little different.

I do not have `clang` installed but the author explains that this compiler is even more picky than gcc/c99.
It provides even more lines with diagnostics information. Diagnostics output is useful information that helps
debug programs at the compilation phase. `clang` would not produce an executable binary if we tried to compile
the above program with that compiler. You are able to make the compiler to disapproved entirely of
programs that produce certain diagnostic messages. For example for gcc/c99, this flag would be
`-Werror`. The first program had some good portability features while the second introduced some
modifcations which hurt the portability significantly. The compiler program, like gcc, is here to help
us, the programmer, drill down and figure out where we can improve our code. With some trials and
experience, it should become easier to understand the diagnostics messages. A C program should compile
without warnings or errors. That is, the program should should compile cleanly.

* C gives computers orders. It is a layer of abstraction between us and the hardware platform
* C must be compiled. The compiler gives meaning to the syntax in source files as it relates to machine instructions
* A correct C program is portable and usable on many computers
* The C compiler is meant to help us. Pay attention to the diagnostics messages

#### Main structure of a C program

Sections
: C grammar
: Identifier declaration
: Object definitions
: Statements and the compiler

The examples from the previous section were pretty basic. Real programs written in C will, predictably, be more
complex in their construction. The overall structure will be similar, but they will inherently be more useful
while being more intricate. There are two major aspects of a C program that are worthy of our consideration.
One being that of syntax, that is, what is a valid C program. The other being semantics, that is, how do we
specify what it is that we want the program to accomplish. Said another way, semantics of a C program is
determining the meaning of the program. We will explore the aspect of syntax (or grammar) and a few different
aspects of semantics. Semantics will include declarative, definition, and statements as they relate to the
meaning of the program.

##### Grammar in C

C programs are composed of several types of elements of text; these elements of text make up a sort of grammar.

**Special Words**, or keywords. Our previous examples included a few special words, like *#include*, *int*,
*void*, *double*, *for*, and *return*. These words have very precise meaning in C. Their meanings can not be
modified in programs.

**Punctuation**. C has several types of marks which serve as punctuation in programs.
Brackets in particular are widely seen.

* { ... } Curly brackets
* ( ... ) Parentheses
* [ ... ] Square brackets
* /* ... */ block/multi-line comments
* < ... > have special use and are rare in C

The first four brackets are not required to open and close on the same line. This is seen in the above
examples, specifically when using a `for` loop or calling `printf`.

Commas and semicolons both appear in C as separators or terminators. Commas separate the arguments to `printf`,
for example. The comma can also trail the last element in a list definition.

Newcomers to C might have difficulty in noticing the subtle differences between the different meaning of the
same punctuation used on different occasions. It is important to realize that punctuation characters can be
used repeatedly in different conditions to produce different outcomes in the program.
